

# About the repository

This repository demonstrates the service composition language an engine developped that allows for incrementatal computation when composition service. Recall that the language is based on guarded attribute grammars and asynchronous communication following a publish subscribe scheme. Incremental computation is the fact for a service to be able to process lasily its input as they are required in the computation and to return greedily its input as they are computed by the internal thread assigned to their computation. Incremental computation enforce parrallel computing as a service is not blocked while waiting for not yet necessary input, and similarly a service will make available its output independently as soon as they are computed to anticipate computing of the other services waiting these values.

# 1 Project Structure

The project is structure as follows:
- certificates: This folder contains the ssl certificates automatically generated for the docker registry inside the cluster
- configs: This folder contains the join script automatically generated by the master node to allow the worker nodes to join the kubernetes cluster
- Deployment Scripts: This folder contains the differents script used for the deployment of the cluster where the services will be deployed. The folder contains 4 files: commons.sh which is the script that contains the common setup to install on all nodes such as kubernetes and docker. docker_install.sh is the subscript use by common.sh to install the docker on all nodes. master.sh is the script that contains the setup specific to the master node such as kube admin and a docker registry where the docker images of the services will be stored. Node.sh contains the specific setup for the worker nodes. In particular the trust of the ssl certficates generate by the master node and the join of the kubernetes cluster intiated by the master node.
- GAG Service Engine. This folder contains the java engine that execute incremental service. The engine is to be deployed with kubernetes using docker, but can however be ran locally using a simple JVM hence someone can test service composition locally without the need of a cluster. However this readme does not dealt with this usage. A dedicated readme will be provider for such usage later.
- Tests: This folder contains the different test scripts, as well as the folder containing the output results of the tests scripts.  


# 2 Specification 

The specification of the merge sort implemented as composition of incrementatl services can be found in the folder Tests/TestRunIn. Recall that the principle is to represente a recursive sort having as input and output a variable number of cells. In this repository, this variable number of cells is called $NUMBER_OF_BLOCK$ and it is a parameter of the deployment. The principle is that a recusive service Rect Sort can merge any available pair (ci,cj) ,i,j in {1,..,$NUMBER_OF_BLOCKS$, i!=j. If the excetuion is not incrementall all the cells will be required to be available to be merged. The incremental execution make it possible to merge any pair available, making the execution faster and more robust than a normal execution. Here is snippet of the specification using incremental computation. The complete specification is found in Tests/TestRunIn/specification.
In that folder the file services.yml contains the declaration of the service while the file rules.yml contains the specifation of the service behavior and composition

```yaml
---
# Service: MainSort --- 2 rules
# R1 is active when the list is long enough to distribute computation.
kind : rule
name : MainSort_remote
service : MainSort
guard : 
 classPath: com.local.SortFunc
 method: lengthgr
 # The guard requires a minimum length l+1 of the input list
functions :
 - { classPath: com.local.SortFunc, method: merge_f, label: merge_f}
 - { classPath: com.local.SortFunc, method: getNUMBER_OF_BLOCKS, label: getNUMBER_OF_BLOCKS}
 # update_values replaces some intentional values in out_list.
actions :
 - out_array =  RecSort(inp_list)
 - length = getNUMBER_OF_BLOCKS()
 - (size, arr, out_list) =  Merge | ${NUMBER_OF_BLOCKS} (length,out_array) # merge incrementally

...

---
#Service: RecSort -- 2 rules:
# R1 is active when the list is long enough to distribute computation.
kind : rule
name : RecSort_remote
service : RecSort
guard : 
 classPath: com.local.SortFunc
 method: lengthgr_in_arr
 # The guard requires a minimum length l of the input list
functions :
 - { classPath: com.local.SortFunc, method: divideLeft, label: divideLeft}
 - { classPath: com.local.SortFunc, method: divideRight, label: divideRight}
 - { classPath: com.local.SortFunc, method: init_indices, label: init_indices}
 - { classPath: com.local.Base, method: getZero, label: getZero}
 - { classPath: com.local.Base, method: incrementNumber, label: inc}
actions :
 - pending_indices = init_indices()
 - arr_left = divideLeft(inp_arr)
 - arr_right = divideRight(inp_arr) 
 - res_left =  RecSort(arr_left)
 - res_right =  RecSort(arr_right)
 - ref_left = ~ref(res_left)
 - ref_right = ~ref(res_right)
 - index = getZero()
 - out_arr[index/pending_indices] = [ __internal Merge_S(pending_indices,ref_left,ref_right) for index,inc,${NUMBER_OF_BLOCKS}]

```

# 3 Prerequisite
In order to setup the cluster you need to have:
- a computer of at least 16 giga of ram and a processor with at least 8 threads. 
- Vagrant installed on your computer. Install it if it is not yet installed. The command to install depend on your computer. Ensure your version is greater or equal to 2.4.9 . You can use this command to check your version `vagrant --version`. 
- Virtual box installed on your computer. Install it if it is not yet installed. The command to install depend on your computer.  Ensure your version is greater or equal to 7.0.16. You can check your version of virtual box using `vboxmanage --version` 
- A operating sytems supporting the version of vagrant mentionned above. We have used ubuntu 24, but the version of your system does not really matter as long as your OS support the versions of vagrant and virtual box manage. As ubuntu is a unix based system, we therefore recommed to use a unix based system such ubuntu, fedora, debian or mac os.



# 4 Getting started

To launch the cluster, clone the repository using `git clone`. Position yourself on the root folder of the repository and run `vagrant up`. You can have to possible error depending on your computer and current version of virtual box.
- Local network error: If you have an error concerning the network creation,
  use the following fix (1) create a folder vbox in your /etc/
  (2) inside the folder create a file networks.conf with the following content
  ```
  * 10.0.0.0/8 192.168.0.0/16
  * 2001::/64
  ```
  (3) destroy all machines with "vagrant destroy" and relaunch with "vagrant up". This is a permanent fix and you will not have to apply it again in your next run of `vagrant up`

-  VboxManage error: If you are on a linux based systeme and you have vbox manage error telling you that VirtualBox can't operate in VMX root mode, then apply this quick fix by running `sudo modprobe -r kvm_intel`. After you have run the command, run `vagrant up` again and the cluster will be created. Note that this is a quick fix and you will have to run the command after you reboot your computer in order to be able to sucessfully run `vagrant up` again.

Note that these two errors are not suppose to haven, however since it may happen in some environment we judged necessary to provide manner to fix them in this documentation. If because of Internet error `vagrant up` does not succeed to terminate. You will have to run `vagrant destroy` and destroy all the machines before running vagrant up again. This is because if an issue happen for instance in the creation of the second node, due to network issues (for instance faillin to fecth a library), then in the subsequent run of `vagrant up`, vagrant up will skip the node an continue on the third node, leaving the second node in an incomplete state.   

If you whish to stop the machines you can run the command `vagrant halt`. Also note that vagrant stop automatically all the machines after you stop your computer. 

## Cluster

The Cluster that will be created will contain three nodes. One master node and two worker nodes. Their respective capacities are 3 vCPUs (1.80 GHz) and 8192 MB live memory; 2 vCPUs (1.80 GHz) and 4096 MB live memory; and 2 vCPUs (1.80 GHz) and 4096 MB live memory. 
The created cluster will directly have kubernetes configured in all machine and docker installed in all machines. In particular the master node will already have a
docker registry running with self-signed ssl certificates. Note that this self-signed certifcates is already trusted by all the nodes that can pull docker image safely using https protocol.



# 5 Run the experimental tests of the sicientific paper

This last section explain how to reproduce the experimentation made in the paper.
Note that to follow this section you need to have gone through all previous sections. 

## Push the services image.

There is a Dockerfile present in the folder GAG Service Engine that allows to build an image containing the engine and all the services needed for the incremental merge sort. To build and push the images follows these steps:

- Log into the master using the command `vagrant ssh master`
- Once logged in position your inside the GAG folder using the command
`cd "/vagrant/GAG Service Engine"`.
- Inside the folder run the command `sudo ./start.sh`. This will build the image
and push it to the docker repository.

## Run a test

Inside the folder Tests there are several folders to considers attentively.
- First the folder `TestRunIn` contains the specification of the merge sort.
However in that specification, several values contains placeholder and not valid values for instance, in the file deployment-worker.yml inside the folder specification, inside `TestRunIn`, you have the place holders `WORKER_POD_CAPACITY` in ` cpu: "${WORKER_POD_CAPACITY}m"`. When an experimentation is launched, the palceholders are replaced with the value of the environment variable, and the updated specification is placed inside the folder TestRunOut.

- The folder TestRunOut, as mentionned before contains the updatep specification with placeholders having values after an experimentation is launched. 

- the file changeenv.py. This script performs Template Injection. It scans TestRunIn for placeholders (e.g., ${WORKER_POD_CAPACITY}) and replaces them with active environment variables, generating the final YAML files in TestRunOut. 
- the file runtest.py. Manages the Life Cycle of a single benchmark. It uses cpuusage.py to ensure host CPU usage is below 15% to avoid noise, performs a "warming" phase to stabilize the JVM's JIT compiler, and executes tasks via kubectl exec.
- the file runglobaltest.py. this file allows to run the batch experimentations using runtest.py. The environment variables can be defined following two format, either they can be set directly inside the file by updating the value of the dictionnary `env_variables`, or by using the argument
--env-file \path\to\env\file.
- the file runglobaltestandmerge.py. This file allows to re-run certain experimental data, when they have inconsistent result and to merge them whith the initial data obtained with runglobaltest.py. Since the processor rate depends on the due to thermal throttling or background system tasks, some execution time can be inconsistent according to the overall curve. having the real execution time of the point is as simple as rerunning the test. We recommend to reduce the inconsistency to run runglobaltest.py only when the computer is plugged in.
- The folder Scripts contains the different scripts for each test set in the paper. Inside the folder you will found folders Set\# where \# represent the number of the set. Inside a folder Set#, you will find the script set#.py which correspondong to the script needed to draw the curve after the experimentation; a folder paper_data corresponding to the experimental data of the paper; a file set#.png corresponding of the curve of the paper, and a file set#.json which contains the environment variable of the paper.
- The folder Results contains the folders containing the results of an experimentation after an experimentation is launched.

### Run the fist test set.

In order to run the first test sets inside the /vagrant/Tests folder run the command `python3 runglobaltest.py --env-file Scripts/Set1/set1.json`. After the test is complete, you can now draw the curve using the command
`python3 Scripts/Set1/set1.py --dir Results/NumberOfWorkers/Incremental`

### Run the second test set 

In order to run the second test sets, inside the /vagrant/Tests folder run the command `python3 runglobaltest.py --env-file Scripts/Set2/set2.json`. After the test is complete, you can now draw the curve using the command
`python3 Scripts/Set2/set2.py --dir Results/NumberOfBlocks/Incremental`


### Run the third test set 

In order to run the third test sets, inside the /vagrant/Tests folder run the command `python3 runglobaltest.py --env-file Scripts/Set3/set3.json`. After the test is complete, you can now draw the curve using the command
`python3 Scripts/Set3/set3.py --dir Results/Maxlen`


### Run the forth test set 

In order to run the forth test sets, inside the /vagrant/Tests folder run the command `python3 runglobaltest.py --env-file Scripts/Set4/set4.json`. After the test is complete, you can now draw the curve using the command
`python3 Scripts/Set4/set4.py --dir Results/Maxlen`. It is obvious to notice that since both test 3 and 4 are mainly related to the maximum threshold for the recursive sort, there are using the same directory `Maxlen` for output results. Hence before running these tests you should ensure that the folder `Maxlen` is empty.

### Run the fifth test set 

In order to run the fifth test sets, inside the /vagrant/Tests folder run the command `python3 runglobaltest.py --env-file Scripts/Set5/set5.json`. After the test is complete, you can now draw the curve using the command
`python3 Scripts/Set5/set5.py --dir Results/Probalility`


### Run the sixth test set 

In order to run the sixth test sets, inside the /vagrant/Tests folder run the command `python3 runglobaltest.py --env-file Scripts/Set6/set6.json`. After the test is complete, you can now draw the curve using the command
`python3 Scripts/Set6/set6.py --dir Results/Probalility`. Since both test 5 and 6 are related to analysing the incremental behavior with a variable worker faillure rates, both test are using the same output folder for their result. Hence before running any of these test, you should ensure that the folder `Results/Probability` is empty. Also note that for test 5 and 6 the environment variable MAX_CONCURRENT_SERVICE_REQUEST for a pod in the worker is to 1, while this value is not restricted for precedent tests. This is only because we needed to introduced artificial faillure on the pod, and in order to it in a simple way we restricted for that test that a pod is force to sort only one data cell (an array containing the input of the threshold lenght) at a time. The pod still are still processing their request in parrallel but when a faillure occur it is only one data cell that is lost.



Each of the test above can take up to 5 hours to complete. In particular the first test set can take up to 8 hours to complete. You can stop a test at any time by tiping `Ctrl+C` twice. Note that after you stop a step you can resume it by running `python3 runglobaltest.py --env-file Scripts/Set\#/set\#.json` when \# is the test number. This is particular helpfull meaning you have the flexibility to stop a step and complete it later once you have time. However it will resume from the last synchronization point and hence, you can loose the output generated in the last hour, which will be recreate automatically by the script. AI explain better here by exploiting the contain of runglobaltest.y and runtest.py. 