# About the repository

This repository demonstrates a service composition language and an engine developed to enable incremental computation when composing services. Recall that the language is based on guarded attribute grammars and asynchronous communication following a publish–subscribe scheme. Incremental computation refers to the ability of a service to process its input lazily, as required during the computation, and to return its output greedily as soon as it is produced by the internal thread assigned to its computation. Incremental computation enforces parallel computing, as a service is not blocked while waiting for inputs that are not yet necessary, and similarly, a service makes its outputs available independently as soon as they are computed, anticipating the execution of other services waiting for these values.

# 1 Project Structure

The project is structured as follows:
- certificates: This folder contains the SSL certificates automatically generated for the Docker registry inside the cluster
- configs: This folder contains the join script automatically generated by the master node to allow the worker nodes to join the Kubernetes cluster
- Deployment Scripts: This folder contains the different scripts used for the deployment of the cluster where the services will be deployed. The folder contains 4 files: commons.sh, which contains the common setup to install on all nodes such as Kubernetes and Docker. docker_install.sh is the subscript used by commons.sh to install Docker on all nodes. master.sh contains the setup specific to the master node such as kubeadm and a Docker registry where the Docker images of the services will be stored. Node.sh contains the setup specific to the worker nodes, in particular the trust of the SSL certificates generated by the master node and the join of the Kubernetes cluster initiated by the master node.
- GAG Service Engine: This folder contains the Java engine that executes incremental services. The engine is to be deployed with Kubernetes using Docker, but can however be run locally using a simple JVM. Hence, one can test service composition locally without the need for a cluster. However, this README does not deal with this usage. A dedicated README will be provided for such usage later.
- Tests: This folder contains the different test scripts, as well as the folders containing the output results of the test scripts.  

# 2 Specification 

The specification of the merge sort implemented as a composition of incremental services can be found in the folder Tests/TestRunIn. Recall that the principle is to represent a recursive sort having as input and output a variable number of cells. In this repository, this variable number of cells is called $NUMBER_OF_BLOCKS$ and it is a parameter of the deployment. The principle is that a recursive service RecSort can merge any available pair (ci, cj), with i, j in {1, .., $NUMBER_OF_BLOCKS$}, i ≠ j. If the execution is not incremental, all the cells are required to be available before merging. Incremental execution makes it possible to merge any available pair, making the execution faster and more robust than a normal execution. Here is a snippet of the specification using incremental computation. The complete specification is found in Tests/TestRunIn/specification. In that folder, the file services.yml contains the declaration of the services while the file rules.yml contains the specification of the service behavior and composition.

```yaml
---
# Service: MainSort --- 2 rules
# R1 is active when the list is long enough to distribute computation.
kind : rule
name : MainSort_remote
service : MainSort
guard : 
 classPath: com.local.SortFunc
 method: lengthgr
 # The guard requires a minimum length l+1 of the input list
functions :
 - { classPath: com.local.SortFunc, method: merge_f, label: merge_f}
 - { classPath: com.local.SortFunc, method: getNUMBER_OF_BLOCKS, label: getNUMBER_OF_BLOCKS}
 # update_values replaces some intentional values in out_list.
actions :
 - out_array =  RecSort(inp_list)
 - length = getNUMBER_OF_BLOCKS()
 - (size, arr, out_list) =  Merge | ${NUMBER_OF_BLOCKS} (length,out_array) # merge incrementally

...

---
#Service: RecSort -- 2 rules:
# R1 is active when the list is long enough to distribute computation.
kind : rule
name : RecSort_remote
service : RecSort
guard : 
 classPath: com.local.SortFunc
 method: lengthgr_in_arr
 # The guard requires a minimum length l of the input list
functions :
 - { classPath: com.local.SortFunc, method: divideLeft, label: divideLeft}
 - { classPath: com.local.SortFunc, method: divideRight, label: divideRight}
 - { classPath: com.local.SortFunc, method: init_indices, label: init_indices}
 - { classPath: com.local.Base, method: getZero, label: getZero}
 - { classPath: com.local.Base, method: incrementNumber, label: inc}
actions :
 - pending_indices = init_indices()
 - arr_left = divideLeft(inp_arr)
 - arr_right = divideRight(inp_arr) 
 - res_left =  RecSort(arr_left)
 - res_right =  RecSort(arr_right)
 - ref_left = ~ref(res_left)
 - ref_right = ~ref(res_right)
 - index = getZero()
 - out_arr[index/pending_indices] = [ __internal Merge_S(pending_indices,ref_left,ref_right) for index,inc,${NUMBER_OF_BLOCKS}]
 ```